---
layout: post
title: 'Moving the Computer System at Work - Exhausting!'
tags: [general]
redirect_from: /blog/archive/2007/04/21/cendiomove
---

Yesterday was spent moving the computer resources at work ([Cendio
AB](http://www.cendio.com)) from our old offices to our new ones. Quite
an exhausting day.

As usual when you move stuff, things break. And regardless of how much
you plan and try to think about everything, things go wrong. \

One example of the former was that the power supply of our firewall
choose to break down completely when we tried to start it at its new
location. **The horror, the horror!** Fortunately, we had an older
machine of the same type which from which we could steal the power
supply, and so far, it's been running stable. I'll keep an eye on it, as
the machine we stole the power supply from have shown stability
problems. Trust me, I'll definitely order a new power supply for shelf
storage.. \

On the "*things go wrong*" side, there was a complete misunderstanding
on how our new network connection (from the same company that provided
the old one, [Tele2](http://www.tele2.se)) should be configured.
Straightening that out took its time, so we had about 3 hours of
complete downtime for our web server. On the other hand, given the
broken firewall, I think only about 1Â½ hour can be blamed on Tele2, and
3 hours is quite OK for such a low traffic site.\

After these two mishaps, most of the other work went fine. We were
especially horrified by the fact that our Xerox 432 SLX (a
scanner/copier/printer/fax thing which as all printers is most happy
when its not working) worked right out of the box - we just connected it
to power, network and phone line, and everything worked as intended. I'm
sure it will break completely as revenge some other time when we *really
really* need it. There's a saying - *God created the computer network,
the devil responded by creating the printers*. Very true, if you ask me.

Not only did I and my colleague Peter install and configure computers in
the new computer room, while my two other colleagues moved the rest of
our computers from our old location to the other - I also had to keep an
eye on the transport of the Xerox, the move of our fax telephone line,
the installation of fire extinguishers and installation of the alarm
system. Lots of things to keep in the head, lots of phone calls. I
counted twentyseven phonecalls during the day.

Eleven hours of sleep later, my muscles are complaining about spending
most of yesterday carrying computers and crawling around 19" racks.
Ouch! But I'm very happy with our new computer room - everything neatly
installed in two racks instead of spread around a large room. Network
equipment mounted well, and new KVM switches making work in the computer
room much easier (our old ones were like playing russian roulette - you
newer knew if you could get a console on the server you needed access
to). \


